#Lab 04: For Loops##“for loops” and combining them with data collection via array indexing###ObjectivesThe main learning goals of this lab activity are to:  1.	Understand the basic idea of a “loop” in a program2.	Write your own loops with the “for” command3.	Use a loop to perform iterative (recursive) calculations of the type that are common in models of population biologySome broad (course-level, semester-long) learning goals that this exercise may relate to:1.	Be able to create and use data structures to store data from your own computer programs2.	Translate words into equations3.	Translate words and equations into working lines of computer code###Cheat SheetHere are some commands that we will use today.  Anything shown in italics here is a placeholder for something you provide.  Stuff that is not in italics must be written as shown (i.e., it is required syntax).Command, usage, and what it does`seq(i, j)`: create a sequence of integers starting with integer i and ending with integer j`print(x)`: print the value stored in the variable x to the console`print(“hi”)`: print the phrase “hi” to the console.  Basic for loop syntax:
	for( i in sequence ) {		command1			command2			...			}	`data <- rep(0, n)`: create a vector of zeros as a place to store some data later.  This vector will have n entries (i.e., the vector has 0 repeated n times).`plot(time, data)`: make a standard x vs. y scatter-plot (e.g., time on the x-axis and data on the y-axis)
`setwd("~/path/to/directory/")`: set working directory to be wherever you want it to be.  By default, RStudio starts in your home directory (i.e., `~`)
`write.csv(x = myDataObject, file = "MyFileName.csv")`: save a .csv version of a myDataObject to the current working directory, in a file named "MyFileName.csv"###Lab problems and questions:  
Complete as many of the following as you can.  Be prepared to share your work with the class, even if your code isn’t working!  Do NOT copy and paste your code from one question to the next; type it fresh each time to reinforce the ideas for yourself.Do all of the following in an R script####Part I.  Practice writing “for loops”.1.	Write a “for loop” that prints the word “hi” to the console 10 times2.	Tim currently has $10 in his piggy bank.  Each week his parents give him an allowance of $5.  Each week he also buys 2 packs of gum.  If the packs of gum cost $1.34 each (with tax included), how much money will Tim have in total eight weeks from now?  Write a for loop that prints (to the console) his total amount of money each week for 8 weeks.3.	A conservation biologist estimates that, under current conditions, a population she is studying will shrink by 5% each year.  Suppose the current population size is 2000 individuals.  What is the expected population size each year for the next seven years?  Write a for loop that calculates it and prints each year’s size to the console.4.	Here is the discrete-time logistic growth equation, used in many models of population abundance over time:
	`n[t] = n[t-1] + ( r * n[t-1] * (K - n[t-1])/K )`	where n[t] is the abundance of the population at time t, n[t – 1] is the abundance of the population in the previous time step, r is the intrinsic growth rate of the population, and K is the environmental carrying capacity for the population.  Suppose that right now is time 1 (i.e., the current time step is t = 1).  **If n[1] = 2500, K = 10000, and r = 0.8, then what do you predict for the value of n[12]?**  Write a for loop that answers this question and that also prints out the abundance of the population each time step.####Part II.  Practice writing “for loops” AND practice storing the data produced by your loops in arrays.1.	Practice some basics of array indexing using for loops  	**1a.** Use the `rep` command to make a vector of 18 zeros (see Cheat Sheet above if you are unsure of the syntax to use).  If you do this correctly, your vector should look like this when displayed in the RStudio console.	`[1] 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0`	**1b.** Suppose you write a for loop that looks something like this: for ( i in seq(1,18) ) { … }This is a loop that is iterated 18 times.  Make the loop store the 3 times the ith value of the iterator (i) in the ith spot of the vector you created in part a.  If you do this correctly, your vector should now look like this in the console:	`[1]  3  6  9 12 15 18 21 24 27 30 33 36 39 42 45 48 51 54`
	**1c.** Repeat part a to make a new vector of zeros.  Then, make the first entry of that vector have a value of 1.  If you do this correctly, your vector should look like this in the console:	`[1] 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0`		**1d.** Write a for loop so that starting with the second entry of the vector created in part c, the value stored in that position in the vector is equal to one plus twice the value of the previous entry (i.e., 1 + (2 * previous entry) ).  If you do this correctly, your vector should look like this when you are done:  	`[1] 1 3  7  15  31  63  127  255  511  1023  2047  4095 8191 16383  32767  65535  131071  262143`2.	One of the most famous sequences of numbers in all of mathematics is the "Fibonacci sequence." According to [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fibonacci_number) (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fibonacci_number):    >the Fibonacci numbers are the numbers in the following integer sequence, called the Fibonacci sequence, and characterized by the fact that every number after the first two is the sum of the two preceding ones:
1 , 1 , 2 , 3 , 5 , 8 , 13 , 21 , 34 , 55 , 89 , 144 , ...  
Often, especially in modern usage, the sequence is extended by one more initial term:  0 , 1 , 1 , 2 , 3 , 5 , 8 , 13 , 21 , 34 , 55 , 89 , 144 , ...  
By definition, the first two numbers in the Fibonacci sequence are either 1 and 1, or 0 and 1, depending on the chosen starting point of the sequence, and each subsequent number is the sum of the previous two.
	Using the information given in that quote (and using a for loop), write code that makes a vector of the first 20 Fibonacci numbers.3.	Redo question 4 from part I above, but now store all the data.  Make two vectors, one called “time” that stores the time steps (1 to 12), and one called “abundance” that stores the data on population abundances predicted from the discrete-time logistic equation.  Then, make a plot of the results (i.e., plot(time, abundance) ).  

4.  Obtain the data and metadata files in the Lab04 folder on Sam's Github site for the course.  The data file is "CO2_data_cut_paste.csv", and the meta-data file is "MetaData_CO2_emissions.txt".  **Copy both of these files into your directory for lab04 in your own repo.**  Read through the meta data to understand what the data file is.  Then, do the following:  
	**4a**.  Read the data into RStudio (hints: (1) You will need to set the working directory using `setwd()` or specify the full file path. (2) Use `read.csv()`)  
	**4b**.  For each of the quantities in the data frame you just imported, except for the `Year`, calculate the percent change from year `i-1` to year `i` across all years.  Your results should be stored in a new data frame or matrix.  Your new object should have headers/column names that make sense (you can use the same ones)
	**4c**.  Use `write.csv()` to save your new data frame to a file. The file should be named "YearlyPercentChangesInCO2.csv", and it should be in your Lab04 folder
 <hr>####Complete all of the above in an R script file (with good comments on all steps) and push that file to your Github repo for this class. 