# Lab 06: Finish up from last week### InstructionsPlease finish and push your work from [last week's lab (Lab 05)](https://github.com/flaxmans/CompBio_on_git/blob/master/Labs/Lab05/lab_05_LoopsAndConditionals.md) if you have not done so already.
### FOR THOSE WHO ARE ALREADY DONE WITH LAB 05:
I'm interested in crowd-sourcing some ideas and problems that seem relevant and interesting to YOU.  The following is an optional exercise but one that I sincerely hope you will choose to do!  
1. Please find a data set of some type that interests you.  It could be one of your own or one that someone else published.  If it is one of your own, make sure it is something you are willing to share.  If it is one that someone else published, please be sure to record all necessary information for attribution.
2. The data set should be in some kind of plain text format, i.e., you should be able to read it in any text editor.
3. Put the data file(s) into a new folder in your CompBioHomeworkAndLabs .git repository.
4. Create a plain text meta-data file explaining the data and also giving attribution to the source of the data.  If there are any copyrights to the data or restrictions on its usage, PLEASE include those. Obviously, if you are using your own data, and you feel it is sensitive in some way, then you may want to find a different data set rather than sharing it to the world!
5. Make a separate plain text file called "DataProblem.txt" that states a data filtering/validation problem.  I'm not asking you to solve that problem yet (though you could comment on potential approaches if you wish), but rather, I want you to make up a challenge that seems like a relevant, real-world data problem to YOU.  Try to make your statement of the challenge as clear as possible.  In other words, what is the anticipated goal or end product of successfully meeting the challenge?  Perhaps also give a hypothetical verbal example if you feel that would help to clearly explain your challenge.
6.  When you are ready, push your data and problem to Github.