# Lab 05: Loops and Conditionals### ObjectivesThe main learning goals of this lab activity are to:  1.	Understand how to implement an `if` statement in your code2.	Write loops that perform calculations AND check the validity of them3.	Use a loop to perform iterative (recursive) calculations of the type that are common in models of population biology4. Practice using vectorized operations, also with conditionals5. Using vectorized conditional operations with "logical" indexing and integer indexing.Some broad (course-level, semester-long) learning goals that this exercise may relate to:1.	Be able to create and use data structures to store data from your own computer programs2.	Translate words into equations3.	Translate words and equations into working lines of computer code### Cheat SheetHere are some commands that we will use today.Command, usage, and what it doesBasic for loop syntax:	for( i in sequence ) {		command1			command2			...			}	Basic if statement syntax:	if( condition ) {		command1			command2			...			}	`mySeqence <- seq(i, j)`: create a sequence of integers starting with integer i and ending with integer j`data <- rep(0, n)`: create a vector of zeros as a place to store some data later.  This vector will have `n` entries (i.e., the vector has `0` repeated `n` times, where `n` is an integer-valued variable).`plot(time, data)`: make a standard x vs. y scatter-plot (e.g., time on the x-axis and data on the y-axis)`lines(x, y)`: add an x vs. y plot to an existing plot`setwd("~/path/to/directory/")`: set working directory to be wherever you want it to be.  By default, RStudio starts in your home directory (i.e., `~`)`write.csv(x = myDataObject, file = "MyFileName.csv")`: save a .csv version of a myDataObject to the current working directory, in a file named "MyFileName.csv"### Lab problems and questions: #### Do all your work in an R script. Follow [best practices](https://github.com/flaxmans/CompBio_on_git/blob/master/CourseDocuments/BestPractices.md) (no magic numbers, label parts, use ample comments, etc.)#### Part I.  Practice some simple conditionals.1.	Create a variable named `x` and assign a numeric value of your choosing to it.  On the next line of code, write an if-else statement that checks if the value is larger than 5.  Your code should print a message about whether the value is larger or smaller than 5.2.	From Sam's github folder for Lab05, obtain and import the file "Vector1.csv".  Note that it will be imported as a data frame and NOT as a vector!  This has consequences for you can access it's data.  Refer back to [Lab03](https://github.com/flaxmans/CompBio_on_git/blob/master/Labs/Lab03/Lab_03_MainActivities.md) for the ways of working with and accessing/changing data in data frames.        2a. Using a `for()` loop, write code that checks each value in the imported data and changes every negative value to be `NA`.  Note: `NA` is an actual value in R that acts as a placeholder and/or signifies that data are missing/absent/not-applicable for a particular position in a data object.    2b. Using vectorized code (no loop) that makes use of "logical" indexing, change all those `NA` values with `NaN`.  Note that `NaN` is a numeric value meaning "not a number".  Also note that R has a function, `is.na()`, for testing if something is an `NA`.    You can NOT use `==` on `NA` values or `NaN` values.        2c. Using  a `which()` statement and integer indexing (again, no loop), change all those `NaN` values with a zero.  Note that R has a function, `is.nan()`, for testing if something is an `NaN`.  You can NOT use `==` on `NA` values or `NaN` values.        2d. Use code to determine how many of the values from the imported data fall in the range between 50 and 100 (inclusive of those endpoints).         2e.  Using any method of your choice, create a new vector of data that has all the values from the imported data that fall in the range between 50 and 100.  Do NOT dynamically grow the array, however.  This vector should be named "FiftyToOneHundred".         2f.  Use `write.csv()` to save your vector to a file named "FiftyToOneHundred.csv".  Please use all default settings with `write.csv()`.  In other words, assuming that your current working directory is your own directory for your work for Lab05, save it with the command `write.csv(x = FiftyToOneHundred, file = "FiftyToOneHundred.csv")`	3. Import the data on CO2 emissions from last week's lab ("CO2_data_cut_paste.csv" from Lab04).  Read the accompanying metadata (in a plain text file in the same directory) to learn what the data represent.  Use code to answer the following questions.  Hint: you do NOT need to use any loops here.  Use some combination of `which()`, logical operators, and/or indexing:	3a. What was the first year for which data on "Gas" emissions were non-zero?	3b. During which years were "Total" emissions between 200 and 300 million metric tons of carbon?<hr>#### Part II. Loops + conditionals + biologyA simple but very famous model of predator-prey dynamics is the "Lotka-Volterra" predator-prey model.  You can read all about it at [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lotka-Volterra_equations](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lotka-Volterra_equations) if you are curious.  In discrete time, this model can be represented as follows:```	n[t] <- n[t-1] + (r * n[t-1]) - (a * n[t-1] * p[t-1])	p[t] <- p[t-1] + (k * a * n[t-1] * p[t-1]) - (m * p[t-1])```In this model, `n[t]` represents the abundance of prey at time `t`, and `p[t]` the abundance of predators at time `t`.  Prey increase in abundance due to exponential growth, represented by the term `(r * n[t-1])`, where `r` is the intrinsic growth rate.  Prey decrease due to consumption by predators, represented by the term `(a * n[t-1] * p[t-1])`, where `a` represents the "attack rate" of predators on prey.  Predators increase in abundance due to consumption of prey, represented by the term `(k * a * n[t-1] * p[t-1])`, where `k` is a conversion constant representing the conversion of consumed prey into biomass of predators.  Predators die at a constant mortality rate, represented by the term `(m * p[t-1])`, where `m` is the intrinsic mortality rate.Write code that calculates abundances of predators and prey over time according to this model. First, set up parameter values.  Use the following: ```	totalGenerations <- 1000	initPrey <- 100 	# initial prey abundance at time t = 1	initPred <- 10		# initial predator abundance at time t = 1	a <- 0.01 		# attack rate	r <- 0.2 		# growth rate of prey	m <- 0.05 		# mortality rate of predators	k <- 0.1 		# conversion constant of prey into predators```Second, create a "time" vector, and make two additional vectors to store results, one for the values of `n` over time, and the other to store values of `p`.Third, write a loop that implements the calculations.Fourth, in this model it is possible that the predators may kill off all the prey.  Due to the discrete nature of how time is considered in this model (time proceeds in discrete jumps from one generation to the next), it is possible that the calculations as given can result in negative numbers.  So, **add some `if` statements** to your code to check for negative numbers each generation.  **If, for example, a given value of prey abundance is negative, then that value should be set to be zero**.Fifth, make a plot of the abundances of prey and predators over time (see cheat sheet above for using `plot()` and `lines()`).Sixth, create a matrix of your results named "myResults" in which the first column is named "TimeStep", the second column is named "PreyAbundance", and the third column is named "PredatorAbundance".  Write this matrix to a csv in your Lab05 working directory with the command `write.csv(x = myResults, file = "PredPreyResults.csv")`  <hr>#### OPTIONAL Part III. Bonus problem: a parameter studyWrite code that efficiently creates multiple sets of results from the predator-prey model above.  Specifically, your code should create 10 sets of results, one for each value of `initPrey` as given in the following vector: `initPreyVec <-  seq(from = 10, to = 100, by = 10)`.The challenge in this problem is at least three-fold: (i) set up an efficient way of running the code multiple times (do NOT copy and paste 10 times), (ii) create data structures that efficiently store all the data, and (iii) make sure that the data structures somehow enable unambiguous cross-referencing of a given value of `initPrey` with the specific results to which it corresponds.  Use comments to explain in plain words how your data are set up. <hr>#### Complete all of the above in an R script file (with good comments on all steps) and push that file to your GitHub repo for this class.  Turning in WORKING code counts as Assignment 05. 